Error Handling in Data Preprocessing

Data preprocessing is a critical phase of the Crime Rate Prediction System. Improper data can cause model training failures, inaccurate predictions, and system crashes. Therefore, proper error handling mechanisms are implemented to ensure data quality and system reliability.

---
Error Handling in Data Preprocessing
Data preprocessing is a critical phase of the Crime Rate Prediction System. Improper data can cause model training failures, inaccurate predictions, and system crashes. Therefore, proper error handling mechanisms are implemented to ensure data quality and system reliability.

Common Errors and Solutions
1. Dataset File Not Found
Error: FileNotFoundError

Cause: The dataset path is incorrect or the file is missing.

Solution: Use a try-except block to catch the error when reading the CSV file.

Debugging: Use print(DATA_PATH) to verify the location and ensure the file is present in the directory.

2. Missing Values Error
Error: ValueError

Cause: The dataset contains NULL or missing values.

Solution: Use df.dropna() to remove incomplete rows or df.fillna(df.mean(), inplace=True) to fill missing entries with the column mean.

Debugging: Run print(df.isnull().sum()) to see which columns require attention.

3. Duplicate Records
Cause: Repeated crime records exist in the dataset, which can distort analysis.

Solution: Use df.drop_duplicates(inplace=True) to keep only unique entries.

Debugging: Run print("Duplicate Records:", df.duplicated().sum()) to verify cleanup.

4. Missing Column Error
Error: KeyError

Cause: Required columns are missing from the CSV.

Solution: Use print(df.columns) to check the existing structure against expected columns like STATE/UT, YEAR, and TOTAL IPC CRIMES.

5. Invalid Data Type
Error: TypeError

Cause: Numerical data is being interpreted as strings.

Solution: Force type conversion: df["YEAR"] = df["YEAR"].astype(int).

Debugging: Use print(df.dtypes) to inspect column types.

6. Normalization Error
Error: ValueError

Cause: The dataset contains non-numeric strings that prevent calculation.

Solution: Convert to numeric using pd.to_numeric(column, errors="coerce").

Debugging: Verify the conversion with print(df["TOTAL IPC CRIMES"].dtype).

7. Empty Dataset Error
Error: ValueError: Found array with 0 sample(s)

Cause: All records were filtered out during preprocessing.

Solution: Validate data constraints before starting the training process.

Debugging: Check print(df.shape) to ensure the dataset still contains rows and columns.

8. Data Leakage
Cause: Training and testing sets overlap.

Solution: Perform a formal train-test split: from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split.

Debugging: Compare shapes using print(X_train.shape) and print(X_test.shape).

Debugging and Best Practices
Debugging Logs
Integrate status print statements at every stage of your pipeline:

Python
print("Dataset Loaded Successfully")
print("Missing Values Removed")
print("Duplicate Records Removed")
print("Normalization Completed")
print("Train-Test Split Completed")
print("Preprocessing Completed Successfully")
Exception Handling Template
Python
try:
    df = pd.read_csv(DATA_PATH)
    df.dropna(inplace=True)
    df.drop_duplicates(inplace=True)
    print("Preprocessing Completed")
except FileNotFoundError:
    print("Dataset file not found")
except KeyError as e:
    print("Missing Column:", e)
except Exception as e:
    print("Unexpected Error:", e)
Benefits of Error Handling
Prevents Crashes: Stops the system from failing unexpectedly during runtime.

Data Integrity: Ensures that only clean, high-quality data is used for model training.

Model Reliability: Increases the accuracy and consistency of crime predictions.

Maintenance: Makes it significantly easier to identify and fix data-related issues as they arise.

Is there a specific module's error handling you would like to elaborate on next, or would you like to compile this into your final project documentation?
- Improves prediction accuracy.
- Simplifies debugging and maintenance.
