State-Wise LSTM Model Training
Overview
The Crime Rate Prediction System uses Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks to train individual forecasting models for each state and union territory in India. By training separate models rather than a single global model, the system achieves higher accuracy and captures unique crime patterns specific to each region.

Common Errors and Debugging
1. Dataset File Not Found
Error: FileNotFoundError: crime_data_india.csv

Cause: The dataset path is incorrect or the file is missing.

Debugging: Print the DATA_PATH variable. Ensure the file resides in the data/ directory.

2. State Data Not Found
Error: KeyError: STATE/UT

Cause: The column name is missing or misspelled in the CSV.

Debugging: Run print(df.columns) to verify that STATE/UT, YEAR, and TOTAL IPC CRIMES are present.

3. Empty State Dataset
Error: ValueError: Found array with 0 sample(s)

Cause: The filtering process resulted in no records for the selected state.

Debugging: Run print(state_data.shape) and print(state_name) before initiating the training function.

4. TensorFlow Not Installed
Error: ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'tensorflow'

Solution: Install the package via pip install tensorflow. Verify by importing it and running print(tf.__version__).

5. LSTM Input Shape Error
Error: ValueError: Input shape is incompatible

Cause: Incorrect training data dimensions.

Debugging: Run print(X_train.shape). It should typically be in the format (samples, timesteps, features), e.g., (500, 10, 1).

6. Model Training Failed
Error: ValueError during model.fit()

Debugging: Inspect X_train.shape, y_train.shape, X_test.shape, and y_test.shape to ensure no datasets are empty.

7. Model Save Failed
Error: PermissionError

Cause: The system lacks write access to the directory.

Debugging: Confirm the saved_models/ folder exists and has correct write permissions.

8. Memory Error
Error: MemoryError

Cause: The dataset or model parameters are too large for system RAM.

Solution: Reduce the batch_size, epochs, or sequence_length, or train states one by one instead of in a loop.

9. NaN Values Found
Error: ValueError: Input contains NaN

Debugging: Run print(df.isnull().sum()). Use df = df.dropna() to clean the data.

10. Prediction Gives Wrong Values
Cause: Errors in data scaling or inverse transformation.

Debugging: Print predictions and actual_values to verify if the Min-Max Scaler was applied and reversed consistently.

Training Logs & Verification
Debugging Logs
Integrate these logs into run_training.py to trace the training pipeline:

Python
print("Dataset Loaded Successfully")
print("State Training Started:", state)
print("Data Preprocessing Completed")
print("Model Training Started")
print("Model Training Completed")
print("Model Saved Successfully")
Final Verification
After the training loop concludes, verify the volume of models generated:

Python
print("Total States Trained:", len(models))
Expected result: 36 (or the total count of states/UTs in your dataset).

Success Criteria
Dataset Integrity: Load succeeds without errors.

State Coverage: Every state/UT is processed.

Stability: LSTM model training completes without crashes.

Visualization: Accuracy and Loss graphs are successfully generated.

Persistence: State-wise models are correctly saved in the file system.

Performance: Evaluation metrics (MSE/RMSE) are calculated and logged.
